Let's see.
Okay.
So I'm here with Aurora Cuevedo.
Yes.
Quevedo.
It's like queso.
Like queso.
Okay.
And I can't like, for the life of me, I'm like Aurora.
Aurora.
You know, you know, pot of tea.
Pot of tea.
There's your R.
Aurora.
It's just like a party.
You've got it.
Okay.
Every time I want to say it, I feel my tongue.
Because it's a single flap.
They call it a single flap bar.
And it's...
It's there.
It's just English.
Anglophones don't know that they have a single flat heart.
But now you do.
All right.
So we're here.
It's August 12th, and we are in Fresno, in the countryside of Fresno.
Southwest Fresno.
El Fresno de la Gente.
Yes.
So we kind of talked a little bit about my project, and I have really these kind of two basic questions that then kind of lead off into a whole bunch of other questions.
So maybe we can start with, how about you telling us your name and your project?
your age or your birthday.
My name is Aurora Martinez, Flores Hermosa, Villa de Moros, Michel.
So, Martinez, Villa de Moros on my father's side in Mexico City all his life, and Flores Hermosa, Michel on my mother's side
My mother was born in the U.S., in Oakland, because my grandpa brought his family of 10 kids and wife to the States around the time, at the tail end of the Mexican Revolution.
And everybody had been born in Mexico, eight of them.
But my mother and her sibling is right next to her, Tia Violeta, were born in Oakland.
And...
When my mother, then my grandpa and the babies went back to Mexico.
And so they lived in Mexico for a couple of years.
So when my mom was five and my Tia Violeta was about seven, somehow they were back.
I don't quite know the story.
I have to talk to Tia Violeta before she leaves.
They were back in Oakland.
My grandmother passed away.
And so when my grandmother passed away,
My grandfather couldn't care for them for some reason.
And she gave my mother and Tia Violeta to the oldest daughter, Tia Carmelita.
They lived in San Francisco at the time.
And so she was, after age five or six, she was raised in San Francisco until she was about 15.
She went back to visit grandpa in Mexico City, met my dad.
in Mexico City.
He took her horseback riding and brought her serenatas and they fell in love and they got married.
She was about 17.
She was about 26.
He was almost 10 years older than she was.
But in those days it was not necessarily uncommon.
But to my grandpa's
uh, non-conforming of the marriage they married.
And, um, so my mom stayed in Mexico for the next, um, probably close to 20 years, 18 or so years, raised her family of four children.
And, uh, actually he, she divorced my, uh, my dad when I was three, he drank quite a bit.
He's a well-educated,
engineer that the whole family drank a lot, my uncles.
And so she divorced him, but she raised four kids in Mexico City, you know, in the 40s and 50s.
That wasn't a small feat.
And I always remember she always worked.
She either had a mechanic shop or she had a paint store, you know, paint for painting for the houses and stuff.
So she stayed in Mexico until my grandpa died when I was 15.
And then at that point, she would say, well, heaven knows all that she had to do to get us immigration papers because she had her, you know, her dual citizenship.
It was a little easier for her, but it still took her years to get us a green card.
And so we came in a bus from Mexico City.
Wow.
with my mom.
She sold everything that we owned, including my folklorico dresses.
I had a collection because I used to dance.
She sold everything, every stitch of furniture, everything that she owned to get us the bus tickets to make the Al Norte, to reunify with her siblings.
So there was one brother that stayed in Mexico City.
Two brothers, but one had passed away.
The eldest had passed away.
So one brother and his three daughters stayed in Mexico City.
And then everybody else was over here.
Wow.
Brothers and sisters, big family.
So you and your three siblings were born in Mexico City.
Yes.
Is that correct?
And when's your birthday?
How old are you?
January 7th, 1947.
I'm 72 and a half plus.
Wow.
And then so you kind of talked about your early childhood being in Mexico, Mexico City.
Yeah.
And then you guys came up.
How old were you when you guys came?
We came in November, and by January I turned 16.
Oh, wow.
So I was 15 plus.
So you spent pretty much all of your childhood.
Oh, yeah.
Wow.
I came with lots of literacy.
Mm-hmm.
Lots of...
center in terms of, you know, I was very proud to be Mexican.
I was very, very strong in my language, you know, strong math.
I was raised in Mexican public schools, and I haven't said this in a long time, but I used to be very proud of my junior high.
In junior high, in the
Seventh, eighth, and ninth.
In the seventh grade, we had nine different subjects.
And the eighth grade, we had... The eighth grade was the toughest.
We had 13 different subjects.
And in the ninth grade, we had 11 different subjects.
So we had, you know, from home ec to foreign language to science to...
world history.
We had physics in the eighth grade, we had chemistry in the ninth grade.
It was different.
I think that they have changed the system a little bit, but back then in the fifties, the junior high, the secondary curriculum was very
very intense.
We went to school six days a week, including Saturdays.
Some of the PE and home ec and things like that happened on the weekends.
We had, interestingly, we had what we now call
in uh in the u.s block schedule yeah are you familiar with that no i mean i've heard of it but so instead of having uh five or six 50-minute periods you have six or seven um
two to three hour blocks.
And so you go more intensely into the subject.
And so you don't go to the same class.
You go to different classes different days of the week.
So on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays, you have
certain classes, a little more like, you know, what we do in college, except in order to fit that many subjects, you know, they, back then in the fifties, they had actually had block schedules.
Yeah.
You know, but it was six days a week.
And it's interesting too, because I know after the, the Mexican revolution, there was a lot of investment, government investment into education.
Public schools.
Yeah.
So it's interesting to hear you kind of talk about that.
What it was like to live it.
Right, right.
Guess what?
My brother and sister, I'm number three of the four of us.
My brother opened the junior high.
There was no secundaria in Coyoacan, is where I'm from, in Mexico City, which is in the south of the city, near the university.
Right.
And they had him...
bring, my mom had to have a carpintero build him a desk.
You know, a pupitre?
A chair with the old-fashioned, with the wooden pallet thing that comes around, you scoot into.
So when he started, he was the first class of the secundaria diurna 35, number 35.
And diurna meaning it was the morning because they had double.
sessions, they had secundaria in the morning and they had another group in the afternoon, evening.
And so ours was diurna, which is, it was daily and it was in the morning.
And he had to bring his desk.
And my sister was the second group, Rosa Marta, she had to bring a desk.
By the time I got there the following year, they had enough desks.
Oh, wow.
And so I didn't have to bring a desk, but they had to bring a desk.
My mom had to have a capping.
They don't make a desk.
Neat.
Okay, so you and your family, your mom and your siblings were all in Mexico City.
Until you were about 16, you said, is that right?
Almost shy, a couple of months.
Yeah.
So would that have been like 1962, 1963?
November of 1963.
All right.
And then where did you guys come?
Did you guys go back to the Bay Area where her siblings were?
We went straight to my first, my mother.
Remember, my mother is from a family of 10.
She was the baby.
She was the baby of all of them.
So, and remember my mother's oldest sister raised her and Auntie Violet.
So she was a woman married when they were babies.
So grandma was still having babies, right?
Yeah.
It's kind of typical.
And she, she was, I lost my train of thought.
You're talking about your mother.
Like where you guys went, came back to in the U.S.
So she reunified with her.
So, but, you know, we can gather, my mom and we never, I wish we had talked more.
Mm-hmm.
But she had a support system over here.
And so there had been an agreement that Auntie Dolores, who was really not my auntie, she's my first cousin Dolores.
Mm-hmm.
Who was my mother's age.
because Auntie Carmen didn't have any children.
The one that raised the girls didn't have any children, but Auntie Katie had a daughter, Dolores.
And so Dolores sponsored us because in those days you had to be sponsored by someone.
And so, um, Dolores and her family, um, took us into their house.
We lived in her basement in, uh,
In Piedmont Hills, which is at the time, it was a very segregated part of Oakland.
As a matter of fact, my sister and I were the only Latinas in the whole school in Oakland, in Piedmont High.
And segregated with whites?
Totally.
Almost 100, well, it was probably 99% white.
There were two Japanese brother and sister.
There were two African-American brothers.
I can't remember if they were, I think they were both girls and my sister and me.
We were in the school newspaper because we were not a D. And then, of course, after that, the schools, you know, totally desegregated.
Right.
But you would think it was a different world, you know.
So we, once my mom, my mom,
It got a job through Auntie Dolores, too, my cousin Dolores, waitressing.
And she pretty much stayed with waitressing.
That's how she pulled us through.
I remember she used to sit on the bed and count her pennies and quarters and dimes, her...
Her tips.
Yeah.
That's mostly what she raised us.
But so when she was able to save a little bit of money, we lived with another first cousin, Uncle Mike.
So we went from Piedmont three months, and then we went down right below Piedmont to my cousin Miguel and his family, and they took us in for a
I think we were there only a few weeks.
I don't think it was that long.
Maybe a matter of a month or so.
And she found a house across the street from Oakland High and moved into our little Casa Verde across the street from the school.
Went to the old Oakland High before they tore it down.
They tore all those old beautiful schools down.
And we graduated from Oakland High.
Nice.
And the, probably, I say this, I think it's more of an urban legend type of memory on my part, but I always say that the day after graduation, my mom packed us in the car and we came to San Jose.
Oh, wow.
Because that's where my mom bought a house.
I don't know if you're familiar with San Jose King and Story.
Yeah.
That's where I'm from, San Jose.
Okay.
So if you go into Tully, between Tully and King Road, on the east side of King Road, it's a huge... It was the new area that was called Tropicana.
Yeah.
And so my mom was, you know, I mean, she paid something like...
$15,000 or something for her little casita en la Tropicana.
Mi esposo Jesús.
Hello.
How are you?
Rocio is, I think, didn't you meet her dad?
Yeah.
With the long ponytail?
Last weekend at the play.
Oh, we were at the play.
Okay, yeah.
He's the friend from San Jose that I tell you.
Remember his property flooded?
The river overtook his property in Modesto?
Oh, that's right.
He was telling you about his two tractors.
Oh, the tractors.
They were talking tractors.
He's been up on the tractor this morning.
Look at them.
Hey, it keeps you going.
It keeps you busy, huh?
Yeah, a lot to do.
And so...
So the day after graduation, urban legend, we moved to San Jose and right away, right away, you know, get a job, get a job.
So my sister and I, my mom was working.
So my sister and I got on the bus and we, and we went to the
the um at the time what was the employment office called at the time i think it was employment office yeah i'm not sure now they call it human resources development so we we went to the employment development department yeah yeah so we went to the the employment office and um we were invited to go through some training
And so we participated in the Manpower Development and Training Act, MDTA.
It was pretty big in those days.
And it was a training program to give you job skills.
So in order for us to qualify, we just graduated from high school.
my sister held herself back.
She could have graduated.
I went straight into the 10th grade.
She went into the 10th grade with me.
I had just finished my 9th grade.
She had just finished her 10th grade in Mexico, but she was a little bit more shy than I. I'm not shy.
So she wanted to be with you.
She wanted to be with me, and so she held herself back, and my mom agreed to that.
And so we graduated together in 1965.
And so we went
to the employment office in San Jose.
And they offered us, um, this MDTA train clerk typist training program.
And, uh, it was a one year program.
They, they taught us basic accounting, um, and, uh, typing, um, clerking, you know, in general.
And, um, from there,
My clerk instructor was very pushy with me that she wanted me to consider.
school, which is something that I was very interested in.
But my high school counselor told me I was going to make a good cook and a good waitress if I graduated.
Sounds typical.
And so it didn't take a lot of convincing.
So she kind of pushed you towards going to university or college?
Well, she came to class one day.
It was a one-year training program.
I finished it.
I got my little certificate.
She came over to school one day and she had the app and she sat with me.
We completed the app and I went straight to San Jose State.
I got accepted, yeah.
Great.
So perhaps that will take me to my kind of first big question, which is, do you consider yourself to be a participant in the Chicano movement?
And if so, what did you see as your role or how did you participate?
My first, yes, I do consider myself
to have been intuitively dissatisfied.
I was very satisfied with my high school counselor.
I held a grudge for a long time.
I'll tell you later how I let go of it.
When I was at San Jose State, it was pre-EOP, Economic Opportunity Program, which is the program that first came into the state university system to help with tuition and tutoring and things to bring more diversity into the state system, not only San Jose State.
And so this was pre-EOP, but in order
For that to come about, there was quite a bit of activism on the campus.
There was a club.
Chicano, what was the name of the club?
I'll think of the name or I'll get you the name.
But there was a group of students that were older than me.
A lot of the kids that I hung out with were older than me because I ended up majoring in English and in Spanish and minored in linguistics.
And so my Spanish major, although I was a freshman, I was taking upper division in Spanish classes because they placed me.
at upper division level because I had, you know, the strong literate skills that I brought with me from Mexico.
So they didn't make me start with lower division Spanish.
I did some testing and they gave me credit, not units, but they gave me knowledge credit.
And so I was able to start upper division.
And so I had kids that were two, three, four years older than me.
And so they were the Ramon Martinez's of the group.
Ramon is only two, three, four years older than I am, just slightly.
The TV went on.
Oh, this truck.
Oh, I was watching MSNC.
So there was quite a bit of student involvement in that.
It wants to be on.
The spirits want to watch TV?
My brother and mom wants to watch TV.
Oh, here's another woman that you might want to meet.
She's right here in Fresno.
Her name is Diana Gaspar Pena.
She's an artist, and she's a very interesting woman.
Diana Gaspar Pena.
She came from the Bay Area too.
Okay, so you were talking about being at San Jose State.
Campus activism.
Were you there?
Did you go there?
Would that have been around 1967?
I started in 66.
Oh, okay.
So campus activism.
Uh-huh.
And is this, is it Chicano activism or is it more like anti-war?
Because I've been hearing a lot from my interviews that there is, yeah, that there's like almost, it's like there was this initial anti-war sentiment that then got kind of like funneled into politics.
Chicano stuff?
No, I think it was the other way.
No, the whole campus was vibrating with anti-war, but within our Spanish language group, foreign languages in general, there was a group that wanted to have
We didn't want to be invincible.
Invisible, excuse me.
Invisible.
We did cultural events.
We organized a group that brought us together.
You know, we shared food together.
We talked about our struggles in classes.
Our, you know, I mean, my...
My English was about three years old at the time.
And, you know, I struggled through it kind of on my own.
And so did everybody else.
And both in basic math, basic, not basic math, basic English and the history classes were very difficult for me.
The U.S.
history was somewhat new to me.
You know, it was about three years old.
Yeah.
Three years of U.S.
history that I'd had.
I'd had a little bit in the Mexican schools, but not the depth that I needed in order to succeed at the college level.
Right.
In the history classes for general.
And I remember talking to each other about becoming, we actually became a support group to each other.
You know, I helped people with their Spanish.
They helped me with my English.
So-and-so helped so-and-fulanita with their math.
I did some helping with math.
Just kind of like peer mentoring.
We did that kind of intuitively.
You know, the university wasn't giving it to us.
Right.
And some of us were struggling in different areas, but we were all very talented, more so in some areas than in others, right?
And so we kind of did that for each other.
We became a support group.
And then that developed into...
you know, vamos a poner bailes, vamos a, you know, little skits, little things, having some visibility with the student union.
You know, we weren't involved in the ASB.
We wanted to have a voice.
We wanted, we didn't, we didn't, I mean, we were there by the, by the straps of the boots or what do you call them?
Bootstraps?
But yeah, you know, we were there because we had,
Oh.
Because we had, I mean, we were there.
The fact that we were there, you know, most of us, my mom was, at the time, my mom was probably working, cutting chavacanos, and probably waitressing, and, you know.
Do you mean, like, you guys, whoever was there at that time was there because of their... Not on scholarships.
Yeah, because of, like, their individual talents, or is that what you mean?
Or ganas.
Yeah.
We were there because we had ganas.
Yeah, not because somebody pushed you or guided you towards it.
Well, this nice teacher was, you know, I'll never, I wish I were in touch with her.
The one from the education, or the employment office.
The one from the clerk typist program.
Yeah.
And, but we were there because we had the, we had the gaspa, we had the,
the coraje, we had the ganas.
We knew who we were, you know, no matter what stuff was going on around us or what the high school counselor said to us or what the community said to us, we wanted to study.
And we wanted, for me, I wanted to study and I wanted to go back to the high school.
I wanted to be a high school counselor.
and do it differently.
So from the very beginning, that was my, I never became a high school counselor, but
And was that because of the experience you had with your high school counseling?
Yeah.
And just because, you know, my, my grandpa, I spent a lot of time with my grandpa cause my mom, you know, was always working and I, um, I always had a, I was always outspoken.
So my mom used to take me down to stay with grandpa for awhile.
He lived four blocks away.
So I spent a lot of time with grandpa and, um,
So we were, I was always interested and my mom was always encouraging us that, you know, we were going to need to be able to fend for ourselves.
The more educated, formally educated we were, the better opportunities we would have.
So even though she, as an important backbone, part of my backbone is my mom, of course.
And she finished San Jose City College, and she went to San Jose State.
She was about two or three classes shy of graduating from San Jose State.
After we were all done with ours, she took herself back to school.
Wow.
Yeah.
She was a pretty amazing woman.
I like it.
Yeah.
Excuse me.
when you're talking about this campus activism at San Jose State, it's a lot of this, like, would you say, because I know Luis Valdez was not there when you were there.
But when I talked to him as part of this oral history, he had mentioned that
he was um that he was kind of like starting a whole bunch of stuff there probably like in 1963 around that time period a little bit earlier yeah so maybe about three or four years before um you were there and i'm wondering if were you aware of or
knowledgeable that any of this had to do with kind of the work and stuff that he had was doing while he was there like did you see any kind of connection i think so because you just reminded me part of that group that was older than me a little bit only you know i mean to me i was a little kid you know fresh out of high school right and uh
And these were, you know, I mean, I looked up to these people that had been there a few years.
And some of them were already married and had families.
But there was a guy, Adrian, your dad will know his last name.
He's a redhead.
Vargas.
Adrian Vargas with Teatro de la Gente.
Yeah.
So, and so that kind of, that kind of makes some connections that I hadn't thought of for a long time.
that there had been another wave prior to Adriana.
Like a cohort before.
Garza, Humberto Garza.
Humberto Garza.
There was Humberto Garza.
Your dad probably knows the name.
Humberto has written, Humberto Garza has written books or a book.
You may want to, you know what?
He's here.
He's in Delano.
He's in this area.
Oh, he would be super interesting to,
He's like Luis and then the group that Humberto hung out with.
He's got it written.
So you may want to, if nothing else, look for that.
And then came the younger folks.
I'm the younger folks, right?
Yeah.
But I ended up lucky.
I was lucky to fall into the group because of my upper division.
Spanish classes that took me to meet a lot of those people that were more involved.
But the university was hopping with activism, not only anti-war, but there was a lot of , and so there were a lot of people into conservation and
I don't know if your dad told you.
I don't know if your dad was at San Jose State.
No, he was at Fresno.
My mom went to San Jose State.
Maybe your dad knows Irma Castro.
Maybe, yeah.
I'll ask him when I get back there today.
Yeah.
The old student union is right on 7th Street.
There was an old... The building's still there.
Yeah, and they remodeled it, like, completely.
I don't know when the last time they've been there.
No, you're talking about the new student union.
Well, it was in the... It used to be the library... No, not the library, but kind of nearby the library, the Clark Library.
Was that there when you were there?
I might be thinking of... You're thinking of the student union that was several stories high.
And it's a lot of cement and all that.
Yeah.
That was built when I was still there.
But prior to that, there was a small little building, probably twice the size of this house.
That was the student union where we had the cafeteria.
I think it's still there.
But anyway, there's a lawn area between 7th Street sidewalk and the building.
It was kind of set way back there.
I wonder if you're talking about the alumni house or if that's different.
It's not one of the old, old buildings.
It's...
Well, it's hard to tell now because they've done so much renovation.
Did you go there?
Yeah, I have three degrees from there.
Well, you know, I don't know if the art department is on the other side of the street and then 7th Street going toward the old student union that I think you're thinking about.
There's a little building that was a very modest little building.
That was the cafeteria in the student union building.
And in that lawn area, I don't know if we did this with permission.
I would suspect we did it without permission.
But they actually brought in a thing.
We dug a hole and we buried a Volkswagen.
Nobody has told you about that?
No.
I've never heard of that.
Preserving the environment and the smog emissions were terrible.
How funny.
I wonder, considering all the remodeling and construction, if they found it.
It's a, what do you call it?
A time capsule.
Like a time capsule?
I don't know.
I don't think we put anything in it.
It was an old Volkswagen.
It was a good Volkswagen.
We were making a statement.
Uh-huh.
For the environment.
So my point is that it was active in many areas for many reasons.
Different causes and stuff like that.
Yeah, we were at the same time.
The other thing that was going on external to the university that was encouraging, I think, the movimiento was the huelga.
Because a great boycott was going on.
This is about probably my second, third year at San Jose State.
So external to the university was the United Farm Workers' issues out in the community.
So we were paving in safe ways.
So there was a lot of things that were confluent that encouraged people to talk, to think, and to...
they, you know, there was a lot of way to find a forum for a lot of critical conversations to happen.
Yeah.
So would you say, um, would you say that your, your introduction or involvement in all of these things was, was mostly, um,
mostly motivated by your interaction with the campus or do you think there was something even before that or you know what was it that that made you join in with these groups what was it that i know you kind of talked about your you know that you guys were peer mentoring and helping each other out while you were at the university i think some of it is just the nature of a person because um
I always liked language and I always expressed myself.
I remember my grandpa seriously encouraging me to become a lawyer because he used to see that in me.
And, you know, he's, of course, grandpa, grandpa age.
He died in his 80s.
So I met him when he was about probably 70, 60s, 70s.
And so I had, I spent a lot of time with grandma and grandpa.
And so conversations tend to be different with older folks.
Yeah, and they never discouraged me from thinking and asking and talking.
I talked a lot.
As a matter of fact, my fifth grade teacher became so frustrated with me because I wouldn't be quiet.
I always had questions.
I do remember that in primaria.
he actually taped my mouth and he had a peer walk me, parade me through the school as a punishment.
So I think that some of the stuff of,
You know, you've got a mind to think and you see, I mean, he used to make us kneel on little piedritas.
I mean, this is the 50s, right?
Yeah.
So we didn't have any of that stuff in the secundaria, but in the primaria, some of the teachers were real old school.
Abusive?
Yeah.
Never to the point where, you know, they were really not as bad as you hear, you know, some of the old timers tell you, but yeah, they were a little bit on the rough side.
And this particular teacher used to make a kneel on little pebbles.
It was bad.
Oh, nice.
Yeah, and for me, I remember that.
That shaming was...
Actually, you know, I remember that as his intention was to shame me.
I think I wore it as a badge.
So what you're saying is you've always been rebellious.
Yeah.
That's why I spent a lot of time with my grandparents because my mom was struggling, you know, for kids and, and she didn't need this mouthy kid, this nonconformist woman that was always challenging.
I mean, I'm, I'm the one that, that stayed with her the longest.
I, I left when I got married.
I mean, the day that I got married is the day I left home.
I stayed with her, you know, but,
And we were really good friends, really good friends.
But we were probably very much this similar, you know.
Yeah.
That, you know, sometimes that creates friction.
I call it constructive.
What is it?
What is it that I call it?
It's constructive tension.
Yeah, I think so.
I think, I don't know.
I think I, um,
There's another phrase, if it comes back, I'll share it with you.
Well, there's constructive criticism.
No, this is constructive tension.
Okay.
Yeah, the stuff that was going on at San Jose State and out in the community and in your head was constructive tension.
I mean, there was, you know, people had to work to get their, to buy their books and pay their tuition.
You know, they had to,
They had to pass their classes.
I mean, we were struggling academically.
We were struggling financially.
I remember, your dad's going to laugh if you tell him this, but I remember, you can tell him this if you want.
I remember having 37 cents enough in my pocket to buy one gallon of gas.
Uh-huh.
to take me from the east side to San Jose State for a couple of days.
I remember that 37 cents for that one gallon.
That was down to 37 cents.
But I think all of that, the kind of intuitive sense that you have of yourself, of your abilities, you know better.
You know better than the system trying to tell you that you're not going to do something.
and your intuition of, you know, no, no, no, no.
Don't tell me I can't do that.
So my grandpa always encouraged me to speak.
I remember that.
That's part of my foundation.
So my mom was having a real hard time with it, right?
Right.
But now that I'm old and I understand her, I understood this a long time ago, you know, she was struggling.
She didn't need on top of everything that she had to survive to have to deal with me.
And she luckily had the support system.
My grandpa's right down the street.
And so I spent quite a bit of time with him.
And a lot of my formation, a lot of my
So at home, I was more restricted from all of that.
At my grandparents' house, I was really encouraged to have a mind of my own.
That's good.
Okay, so we've been talking about your experience and time at San Jose State University, the campus activism, and... The community activism, too.
Oh, okay.
So community and campus.
The UFW.
Right, right, right.
Great influence in my life.
And... So you ended up kind of, even though you didn't plan on it, you ended up going to the environmental activity and you saw the same people.
And you went to the Chicano group and you saw the same people.
You went to the war...
rallies and you saw the same people so we became a support system to each other.
So in terms of the Chicano movement in particular was most of your participation like campus or like education community type of involvement or did you see yourself as a participant in another way?
Yeah, I think it was the core of it was our support system to help each other to get through, to pass classes and to eventually graduate.
So there was a little bit of, not a little bit, a lot of machismo stuff going on in that group.
Has anyone brought this up?
For that particular group at San Jose State?
No.
But a lot of it is because...
The people that I've been interviewing, most of them are from the valley or they didn't go to San Jose State.
The only person, the only two people, well, three people now, including yourself, that have any kind of connection to San Jose State is Luis and my mom.
So I'm not getting a clue.
Yeah, the guys were talking us into typing their papers.
Yeah.
And things like that.
And I did that for a while.
Probably the better part of a year.
And then it... Wait a minute.
So there was some of... I've always thought of it as machismo.
And we probably brought good food to the gatherings and things like that.
But I remember it being an issue for me.
And something that I addressed.
And that's all it took.
You just address it and then it stopped.
Really?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Are you kidding?
I think, well, I think a lot of the narratives, especially the ones that like I hear, not hear about from the actual people that were there, but historians who are doing the work today.
That was an issue.
You hear a lot of like, oh, there was machismo here, there was machismo there.
And then, and it always kind of comes off like nobody wanted to do anything about it.
But it sounds like kind of what you're saying is people were aware, they said stop it, and it stopped.
Yeah, yeah.
But it took a while to, this doesn't feel right.
What is it?
And then addressing it.
Mm-hmm.
And, um, but I do remember, and, and, you know, to some extent it's okay.
To some extent, um, I think I do it even today, you know, things got organized and they got done.
You know, the guys talked a lot and did a lot of the planning.
Um, but the women did a lot of the work to make it actually come to fruition.
Yeah.
Did the phone calling and did the follow up and did the note taking and, and, you know, uh, and it became okay.
Uh, as long as, you know, once it was addressed and then there was more sharing and then, you know, more people across the, the gender lines did the same kind of work, then it was okay.
Yeah.
I'm curious, I mean, since we're talking about that subject right now, I'm curious about whether or not it was, like, did it start that way because there just weren't a lot of women who wanted to be vocal?
Like, it sounds like somebody like you, right, who's very expressive, who's very vocal, who is not afraid to speak their mind...
Like, why would they not tap into you and say, Hey, Aurora, like, why don't you be our speaker for this?
Was it just, was it that, or was it that, you know, a lot of the, the women were not saying, you know, like, Hey, I want to, I want to talk about this.
You know what I mean?
Or am I, I don't think it was that the women didn't, but that it was more, some of these guys were,
remember i mentioned they were married yeah family so they tended to be even older than you would expect they were fresh out of high school two three years down the road they were like five six seven years down the road they were bringing themselves back to school married and back to school so i think for some of them it was in their nature like nobody had interrupted it right so like like
I don't know.
They just had kind of like a traditional type of mindset.
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Yeah.
Okay.
They weren't that much older than, than, uh, than I was, but they were old enough that they, that it was more, you know, but, but, you know, once you address it and if there's, if everybody's collaborating and everybody has, um, everybody's respected, I mean, all of those things.
Right.
You know, when it wasn't feeling, um, fair or just, I mean, those were the issues that we were dealing with.
Yeah.
So that was one of the issues that, that we had to address.
Very interesting.
So, uh, and it didn't stop, of course.
No.
I mean, it, it went into once we got the jobs and we all became teachers, the guys were treated differently.
As a matter of fact, um,
I ended up getting transferred out of San Jose High School to Lincoln High School because a guy with a family, a guy that was one year junior, not age-wise, but in terms of longevity, he got the permanent offer at San Jose High.
And I was transferred into another probationary or temporary position that somebody was out on a leave at Lincoln High.
Why?
Because the guy was married and he had a family.
Right.
And he needed a job.
So you're talking about that...
uh like in general as a structure of like a patriarchal structure yes yes yes right not necessarily like oh these same chicano activists were still doing this and they're the ones no it's just that you know your environment i mean it it never it never really it never really fully changes fully you know yeah no i hear you you probably are dealing with
with issues even, you know, in your generation.
Yes, I have.
Yeah.
So it never ends.
But those are... But it was a good environment, you know, for that creative tension.
Yeah, interesting.
In different ways, in different areas, including your relationship within your own group.
Uh-huh.
And so would you say that that was...
the education factor, whether it's at San Jose state university or, you know, where you moved on after you were, you were done at San Jose state or graduated.
Um, was that the extent of your involvement with the Chicano movement?
Oh no, no.
Um, it became a high school teacher and, uh, the person who hired me, um,
innovated a program that, you know, a lot of people structurally have in place nowadays.
But what he did is he took a hundred juniors and seniors or so, a hundred, 120 of them that were struggling.
They were very capable young people that were, you know, sweat hogs.
You know, you know, sweat hogs?
No.
It's an old movie.
You know, Travolta?
John Travolta.
John Travolta and the Sweat Hogs.
No.
Anyway, they're very, well, you know, Stand and Deliver.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know, the Sweat Hogs, they're very capable that go and ace the AP calculus.
Uh-huh.
They're very capable, but they're not encouraged.
Right.
Yeah.
So we had these 120 kids.
There were six teachers, two English, two math, two social studies teachers.
And we had a non-traditional urban studies program.
And this is high school?
San Jose High.
Oh, San Jose High.
So the guy to hire me hired me into that kind of structure.
And that was...
The environment that I gravitated toward and also people kind of spotted me like the clerk typist teacher, Latina, you know, she spotted me, she brought me the app, you know, then I took it from there.
The same thing with the high school principal went to San Jose State and recruited people that he spotted.
And we went through the credential program.
master's in credential program at Stanford, thank God.
So there are advocates along the way that you play a role that open doors, that open possibilities.
And so that happened.
That led to
he'd been doing it for two or three years, so he had a little core of Chicano teachers that continued to provide that support, that continued to place that creative environment where people can think and talk and create together.
So there was a group
There was actually, in those days, San Jose Unified had two unions.
The AFT, which has the reputation of being a more militant group, was the high school teachers were AFT.
The elementary teachers were CTA, and they had the
tradition of being less militant than AFT, supposedly.
So the high school teachers started a Chicano Teachers Association.
And you were part of that?
Yes.
Oh, wow.
But I may not have been if I had chosen to go into the elementary.
Right.
And I had chosen to go into a different environment.
Uh-huh.
You know what I'm saying?
Yeah.
Eventually, the entire...
district became CTA and there's nothing non-activist about CTA.
CTA is pretty active union, but in those days, the Chicano teachers organization became a part of the AFT.
And so the AFT meetings and so on and so forth, there were groups that were
you know, within the, the teachers association that claimed and reclaimed, you know, their, their own voice.
And they had, they had a presence in the union.
You know what I mean?
And that was CTA?
CTO.
Oh, CTO.
Organization.
CTO.
um your dad might be aware oh no because he was from prison okay so what was um so this is your involvement with the cto is going to be after your the work you did and and the stuff you were doing at san jose state correct correct and then um what just out of curiosity what were you kind of mentioned that that program at san jose high
right, with the sweat hogs.
I'm sorry to call them this.
You know, I say it admiringly because they were very bright, very bright kids that were, you know,
No, yeah, I understand what you're saying.
But we were very successful.
Yeah, so would that have been a program that was organized by that group, the CTO?
Yes, in part, but not exclusively, because Pete, who was the principal, recruited people who were very creative people.
and they were of different backgrounds.
But there were, I would say maybe, I wouldn't say, I know, I think four out of the six teachers were Chicanos.
But there was more, there were a couple more, two or three more that were in the mainstream program that were part of the Chicano teachers group.
So what was the Chicano teachers organization?
Was that just kind of a...
Like, hey, we have our own kind of caucus within this larger.
It was a caucus within the union.
Right.
Yes.
So within the teachers union, California Teachers Association, is that what you're called?
No, American Federation of Teachers.
Oh.
AFT.
You don't hear about AFT that much, but it's a very, as a matter of fact, at the national level, you hear about AFT more so.
AFT is, you know, CTA kind of took over in California, California Teachers Association, right?
AFT was a national union that was active in California, but little by little, I would guess that there aren't very many AFT chapters, AFT units in California anymore.
I think it's pretty much CTA.
But as an example, we used to take kids out into the community as part of their, you know, an extension of their classroom.
Some of our work was, some of our classroom time was spent at Angela Davis trial downtown.
And so it was that kind of group.
Mm-hmm.
Not only Chicano teachers, but it was a group of teachers who were very progressive and very... So maybe interested in, like, social justice?
Oh, yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
And so I taught at San Jose High.
I taught urban studies primarily.
When Pete left, when that transitioned and then moved over to Lincoln High School, I ended up teaching.
I was teaching...
foreign language, urban studies, and Pete left.
And then that next year, they moved me over to teach foreign language.
And so I taught ESL and Spanish.
And in the English department, I started a Chicano literature class at San Jose High.
developed the curriculum and put it together, got it approved, got it through the district, the whole thing.
And of course, when the younger guy
with a family got hired into the permanent position and I got shifted over because I was young and unmarried right so the program didn't continue it was picked up later but it didn't continue yeah that was a real that was a real blow to me I have a friend who works right now at Pioneer High School teaching Chicano literature oh yeah it took years to recuperate yeah
Yeah.
But it teaches you the lesson that if a program or a thing or an activity depends on you, then he didn't finish the job.
Right.
It should not depend on you.
It should continue on.
The principal left.
He's the one that did.
He was very intuitive.
He gave us what we call in Spanish, rienda suelta, when you let go of the reins of the course.
He just let him gallop.
He gave us a lot of galloping slack, right?
But when he left, it hadn't been a structural change in the school.
You know what I mean?
Yeah.
So that I could continue well if he wasn't there.
An important thing that I thought of with the Chicano teachers, Chicano teachers organization, what's it, CTO, CTA, CTO, it's CTO, it's organization.
We...
concurrent to what we were kind of defining some of the work that needed to be done because, you know, I mean, we didn't have a blueprint or anything like that.
Right.
Kind of thinking about it and developing it as we went along.
Yeah.
There was also a very significant court case that plaintiffs in the San Jose High School area
had brought against San Jose Unified for unequal treatment.
And so if you went to San Jose High and you, and this, that had just preceded the time when some of us, when Pete started bringing us in, the court, the lawsuit had just preceded that.
And for example, the science facilities, the science equipment, the PE equipment, the PE activities,
The classroom tools were significantly different for Pioneer and San Jose High.
At the time, Pioneer was not integrated.
You know, Pioneer and Leland and Willow Glen, of course, super.
So this was before desegregation.
So the lawsuit had brought in that dimension into the conversation.
And so what we did, you know, the teacher was not supporting us, but we were picketing at the district office and outside of San Jose High School after work hours because the union wasn't supporting us in support of the efforts of the plaintiffs, right?
for different curriculum, for support systems, for the different programs that we saw the kids not getting at San Jose High and in other schools.
And so the union didn't take it seriously enough to confront the district about it.
So the Chicano Teachers Organization
did make it visible kind of on our own the caucus only right you know we were um years later when i went to the district office i i ended up being an administrator uh-huh i used to tease the older guys that were there and i told them you know i saw you taking my picture when i was out there picketing when you you know i'd really like to keep
Those pictures for my albums.
Come on, give me my pictures.
But, you know, the district was pretty upset about the fact that the AFT had a Chicano caucus.
But later, the same thing happened with CTA.
So the whole district became CTA, right?
And within the CTA, there was a bilingual teacher caucus.
If I'm not mistaken, it might have been the first...
I mean, I probably should research it, but at least that's what we thought, that it was the first official bilingual teacher caucus in the state of California at San Jose Unified.
And so the activism, if you will.
So my environment was always, you know, in answer to your question, that it continued in bilingual ed.
It was not the DSEC court case because that got ruled,
in favor of the district right i i moved i became more involved in bilingual ed because at my new school uh there were i was one of two teachers at lingon high school that that could speak spanish so i taught not only esl i taught math i taught algebra i taught uh state requirements i you know i had like
five different preps because the kids were being sent home with a three-period day, four-period day because they couldn't learn math.
They couldn't learn social studies.
They were being excused from taking state requirements.
Can you believe this?
And so little rookie over here,
I volunteered to teach all this stuff so the kids could have a full schedule and so they could have graduation requirements met, right?
Because these kids were not going to be graduating if they didn't have state requirements, if they didn't pass a certain number of math classes.
You know what I'm saying?
Yeah.
And so a couple of us went out of our ways intuitively, you know.
Right.
But the system has a way of taking advantage.
What time period is this?
Like the 70s, 80s?
This is in the early 70s.
Yeah.
In the early 70s.
Yeah, it's insane to think like, you know, you could hire more teachers.
And it's just not a thought to them, you know?
I was in that temporary role, temporary teacher role for years.
Yeah.
Both years that I was two or three years at San Jose High, and then the rest of my time, most of the rest of my time at Lincoln High, I was in a temporary spot.
You know what that means?
You don't have any kind of tenure.
So they hire you, right?
But they hire you into a slot that somebody is out having a baby or somebody is out sick or whatever.
And so they can manipulate the system into hiring you as a temporary teacher.
So that at the end of the year, the position goes away, the lady comes back from maternity leave or the guy comes back from whatever, and they can just give you your marching orders.
I mean, eventually the things in the unions have changed so that they can't do that to you indefinitely anymore.
You know, they have a probationary one, probationary two, and you got it.
Right.
That's not the way it was in the seven days.
They could keep you.
And so my, my, my, my interest academically and what I taught took me into a different level of, of, uh, activism, you know, and language and social, social justice.
through language and culture.
And so my whole career then took a little bit of a different... So I was very involved in bilingual ed.
All right.
Well, that's all good to know here.
Let me go ahead and switch over to my other main question.
And that's about the concept of mestizaje.
Are you familiar with that?
Mestizaje, maybe you're more familiar with the term mestizo.
No, go ahead and tell me some more.
So, mestizo, mestizaje.
Mestizo is typically the term that's used as an identity.
We might say, oh, I'm a Chicano.
Some people will say, I'm a mestizo.
Or they say both, right?
I'm a Chicano and I'm a mestizo.
And typically when...
somebody says they're mestizo they mean that they are half european and half indigenous indian right um and so i wanted to know if you had any if you're familiar with that concept or that identity and how you understand it um
And it may be different, I mean... No, when I came to the States from Mexico, I think I was very... I think I had some very strong self-awareness that I think came from teachers at the elementary level.
of my identity as the Mexicans that rejected colonialism, that understood the Mexican Revolution, that understood the Mexican independence prior to the revolution.
So I think I had...
quite a bit of... I remember two teachers in particular that spent a lot of time talking about that, you know, the meaning of non-subserviency and your...
your rights, you know, to, to exist, um, without the influence of the, I, I was very bitter, uh, toward Europe and Spain and who, I, I, I've done my DNA more recently and I think it's more than just Spain.
I should have my, my, um, my sense of, uh,
resentment for the onslaught into my culture, thinking my culture, because I think it's more emotional, spiritual, my culture of my native roots in the continent, right?
Because I think my, my, uh, DNA shows Portuguese and French and that kind of stuff.
So it's, it's, um, different than when I, I always assumed it was mostly Spanish, but I always resented it.
I always, um, but I think it had to do with how I was brought into understanding
And you would attribute that to the education that you got in Mexico?
Yes.
Which was kind of a very, like you talked about colonialism, right?
Right.
And I don't think they discussed it that way, but I think it was probably discussions of pride, of authenticity, of si se puede, of
of rejection of the subserviency that was imposed on the, you know, the people that were being oppressed in Mexico.
So it was a lot of that kind of, so I remember those two teachers.
Are you familiar with Jose Vasconcelos and the Raza Cosmica?
Because he was probably, well, maybe earlier,
Than when you would have been attending school, but he was the Secretary of Education.
Right.
Right?
So it's interesting to hear you talk about this.
You know, I never thought of that.
Uh-huh.
That's very interesting.
Yeah.
Because I've really never spent any time understanding, you brought it up a couple of times, the public education system of the times.
Mm-hmm.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, and so my teachers were prepared in that environment.
Right.
I'm looking at the Bolívar story on Netflix.
I haven't seen it, but I want to watch it.
For a very short couple of years of his life, his teacher opens his mind.
That's all it took.
Interesting.
Just a teacher.
Yeah.
Just a teacher to respect him.
And an environment where instead of this active little kid that was always getting into trouble, somebody didn't see him that way.
Right?
Somebody didn't see me that way.
They saw me as somebody with a head, with a mind, with possibilities.
Right.
You know, with...
I mean, it's different.
So it's just interesting.
I just started watching it.
I'm about to check it out.
Okay, so that is a very interesting tidbit there.
It is because I think that you see it in a lot of the immigrants, right?
Yeah.
Where if you've had that kind of fertile environment
fertile for your mind and for who you are and how confident you are in where you're from and how proud you are of your ancestral background.
I remember having that.
And I think all of that helped me to reject a lot of the stuff that I was experiencing here in the States.
And so you see kids that come with literacy skills and with a sense of self and self-worth, nothing's going to stop them.
Which is what we sought to do in bilingual ed.
because a lot of the kids that were coming to us didn't necessarily, hadn't been in Mexico long enough or wherever they were from, Texas or wherever, to have been provided with a fertile place for their mind, you know, to blossom.
And so in bilingual ed, through language and culture and community, we were seeking to do that, to create that fertile environment.
On the topic of mestizaje, it sounds like this is something you're familiar with prior to coming to the US.
I think so.
I know so.
But as you're becoming more involved with Chicano movement stuff, are you seeing this idea of mestizaje or mestizo identity as something that is, I don't know, like are these ideas that are floating around during that time period?
Like when you're involved with the student groups at San Jose State?
Yes, but I think that they were more intuitive.
Mm-hmm.
I don't know that we labeled them.
We called ourselves Chicano.
No, I think at San Jose State we didn't call ourselves a Chicano group.
We called ourselves, it might have been at the Spanish club or something like that.
Or like a La Raza.
La Raza, yes.
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
That's what we called ourselves.
And it made sense.
It fit, you know, for me.
There wasn't a lot of, um, I think for, for some of my peers, it was different because they, they had been born and raised, um, in the States, you know, they had, uh, they had, uh, they had more, um,
I had been sheltered, I think, to some extent from some of the experiences that they had been through that had shaped them, had developed their chicanismo.
For me, it was different because my chicanismo was a Mexican chicanismo, you know?
It was chicanismo, but it was in a different environment.
same issues.
Yeah.
The, you know, the, the class structures, the, the racial structures, the, the, the, the, um, opportunities issue.
I mean, those, those things were all in Mexico.
I mean, you know what I'm saying?
Yeah.
Um, well I think, and tell me if I'm wrong, but it seems like you're
In the context of Mexico, I think what you're talking about is indigenismo.
Yes.
And then in the context of the United States, what's going on here is this chicanismo.
Chicanismo, yeah.
But they can almost be, like some of the things that they're experiencing, right?
Whether you call yourself a Chicano or indigene, that you're dealing with some of these same issues.
Right.
And so that's very helpful.
And it's not only indigenismo, it's also class issues.
Yes.
This is Mexico City.
This is, you know.
Yeah, and the same cabiza for chicanismo too, right?
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
But it was interesting that the...
And my conscientization about all of that and my grasping of what I was bringing to the table and where I was going to take it next kind of took a twist between the two high schools.
Because at the new high school, it really became bilingual ed.
It became cross-cultural ed.
It became crossing borders.
It became also educating others, not just educating the kids, the Chicanos that were in my classes.
It was also educating my peers.
And, you know, and having the kids going into... The school became...
creative and performing arts, having the kids make those.
We put on a play, the kids in my classes and I, that the kids in my classes attended and the parents of the kids in my classes were the ones that attended.
But the vision was to have people in the other
And the rest of the community attended.
Yeah.
And experience it and grow with it.
Is that how you connected with my dad?
Yeah.
Or were you guys connected before that?
No.
Because I know he did some work with the San Jose High students.
Yeah.
And I'm not sure, but I would assume probably some other students.
He probably did some work, not he probably, he did some work with when I became involved more fully in bilingual ed.
And I became the bilingual supervisor, bilingual supervisor for San Jose Unified.
And then I became the bilingual director.
And then we had a thing called the San Jose Area Bilingual Consortium.
And the hub of it,
was in San Jose Unified.
But it was a group of 11 districts that all participated in a federal project in bilingual cross-cultural.
And your dad was pretty involved with the bilingual.
You may want to ask him, but that's where I remember him mostly from.
Mm-hmm.
the time in bilingual ed.
Interesting.
So, okay, let me go back to the mestizaje stuff.
So we were just talking about your introduction with the concept being connected with your education and upbringing in Mexico, right?
In Mexico City in particular.
And we were just talking about kind of these parallels between
chicanismo and indigenismo and so you were kind of talking about whether or not you were seeing I guess that's how we got onto that parallel between chicanismo and indigenismo but
we were talking about whether or not you had seen this concept being utilized or you said that it was intuitive for those groups that were participating in the Chicano movement, right?
And then I just wanted to know if there was anything more you wanted to add about that, like what were you seeing?
How do you think or do you know
Like, what was it that those people were... Where do you think they were introduced if it wasn't just intuitive?
Like, were there books they were reading?
No, I think, to tell you the truth, about half of the group was from Texas.
Interesting.
And I think that some of that they brought... Well, you know they brought with them.
I mean, I brought mine with me.
They brought theirs with them.
And I've always...
thought of that time, my exposure to my consciencia having been shaped to some extent by some of these folks that brought that with them from Texas.
And they came with a similar kind of, you know, it seemed to me that they had had a fertile
ground to open their minds and they came strong and were putting it into practice at San Jose State.
It's like the practice of our awareness that we were meant to be here and that we were here to contribute
and that we were not invisible.
Right.
I think we, different people brought that.
Interesting.
Yeah, there was a bunch of people from Tejas.
Do you know, do you remember, like, where were they, like, from the borderlands or just everywhere?
San Antonio, Houston?
I don't know.
Okay.
I haven't spent too much time thinking about it, but I do remember over the years now and then making those connections.
Do you see this idea of mestizaje or mestizo identity?
Have you seen it since the Chicano movement?
Do you hear a lot of people making reference to it or anything like that, like in more contemporary times?
You know, I don't.
I retired in 2012.
And I think it's...
think it's I don't know I think I need to think about it and I need to explore it a little bit but I I think of it more as chicanismo for me and and so it's something that I'm I need to understand better because I think it's is it new jargon is it is it a new is it a further development of that that that
I need to label a little bit more for myself.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, so it's not a, it's not new jargon.
It's been around for at least 400 or 500 years.
But, but it is, I mean, the concept of it, right.
And maybe the name.
Yeah.
Maybe like the, the,
It probably wasn't being used as an actual term until, or a popular term, until maybe like the end of the 1500s.
But this is, it's one of the, you know, the castas that were used in Mexico, you know, during the colonial period.
Right, right, right.
So it was one of the castas, right?
Yeah, I'm familiar with that, but
as a um being connected with like mexican americans or chicanos in the right right yeah yeah so that's kind of what my my project is about exactly so um and and what i have found so far in my research is that since maybe the late
70s to the between like the 80s and the 90s and even up to now is that this concept of mestizaje is being used as a kind of method for addressing or talking about Latinos in general right so and you see it in a lot of different fields too so history sociology art literature
like tons of stuff right and and that's basically like what my project is about is to say hold on all of these like contemporary scholars are using this thing and we don't even have a grip on you know what this thing is so that's that's kind of what my project is about is to to do that investigation yeah um but uh yeah you know i can't think of like
In most of my other discussions with everybody else, and I think what is unique about my discussion with you is that you are actually from a majority raised in Mexico.
So you have a completely different upbringing than everybody else that I've talked to who's born here, whose families have been here for maybe, who are like your family, right?
Their parents came over.
either during or after the revolution, and had families here, but the families stayed here.
They didn't go back to Mexico, right?
Right, right.
And so your perspective and your experience is really, really interesting and different from these other conversations that I've been having.
So, and it's not to say like, you know, I think it's really fascinating that
that we were kind of able to get this or to be able to see this kind of parallel between Chicanismo and Bigenismo.
So I'm kind of excited about that.
It's also a creative tension issue, isn't it?
You need to tell me more about this creative tension stuff that you're talking about.
related to mestizaje, what does that mean?
Is it, is it that you're acknowledging your indigena roots or is it that you're not you, but I mean that you're, yeah, that's, that's, that's always been my, my dissertation chair.
And I had long conversations.
And she helped me to get through some of that resenta that I was telling you about.
But is it embracing my mestizaje, meaning my European roots,
doing a disservice to my indigenous roots.
That's a creative tension issue for me.
Because even though... Yeah, you know, it's like, where is that, where is my ability
as a human being, for me to practice what I preach in terms of accepting and embracing if I'm not necessarily willing to do that fully for my European roots.
Does that make any sense?
No.
No, it does because I think, well, I think I understand what you're saying as
It's like my anger at the colony of the barbaridades that they brought to my people, my gente, my roots, my native roots, is still not reconciled.
Right.
For me to say that I embrace...
my European roots.
And yet it's, you know, I mean, it's you, I mean, it runs, it runs in your veins, right?
And so even discussing it as my mestizaje, what does that mean?
Is the, is that terminology itself?
It's the, it's, um,
Do you mean by mestizaje that there's an acknowledgement of the indigenous?
Well, it's supposed to be an acknowledgement of both.
See that?
Right.
And to say, like, you know, we were just talking about Bolivar, right?
Bolivar is one of the first political figures to talk about mestizaje as this thing that brings us together, right?
Oh, we're not indigenous and we're not European.
We're a species midway, is what he says.
And Afro.
No, he doesn't.
Big time slavery.
Well, yes, true, but Bolivar doesn't mention that.
Doesn't get there, huh?
Right.
And the thing to remember, too, about Bolivar is that he is a criollo.
Right, right.
So...
So mestizaje, you know, during the colonial period and up to the independence era, it's a status, right?
It means that you're much closer to being...
European.
European than you are to those.
That's my point.
That's why I'm struggling with it.
Yeah.
Indiginals, right?
Right.
The class thing.
Yeah.
The class thing that I was telling you about.
So, I mean, that's reality and it's still there and it's going to continue.
It's been there.
Yeah.
But it's that conciencia, that awareness that is there.
And to what extent do you respect yourself and what makes you up so that you can have that respect for others?
I mean, fully respect others across those classes.
Maybe here is more ethnic and racial and linguistic, but in Mexico, I mean, it's pretty, it's pretty bad.
Yeah, a class.
Yeah, and I think, I mean, you could probably say the same for Mexico, too, right?
That they have class issues.
They have race issues.
Right.
They also have language issues, right?
Spanish is the official language, not, you know, Nahuatl.
El racismo might be even worse in Latin America than it is here, because here we're confronting it.
Yeah.
And I think that's, that's kind of wrapped up with the, the idea of mestizaje, right?
Mestizaje to me, my, my understanding of it is, are you familiar with like colorblind, colorblindness, right?
Well, I don't see race.
I, everybody's, right, right, right, right.
That's colorblindness.
That's mestizaje, but like 200, 300 years before colorblind,
ideology here right so if everybody hey we're not you're not Indian you're not white we're all Mexican right right so in that sense I could see what you're saying you know like here in the U.S.
we're speaking out about it whereas in Mexico it's it's kind of just not really discussed how can you discuss race if everybody's Mexican right
So, yeah, did you have anything else you wanted to add about that?
Well... I can see your brain is working.
I was just going to say that.
A lot of watering of my ground here with the... You know, the concept of... You have brought some...
fertilizer to the party.
It's interesting.
Maybe someday I'll reconcile with that.
And yet, DNA-wise, it's actually very interesting.
I'll send you my DNA stuff so you can see it.
It's very interesting because I've always gravitated to what I thought my
My roots were more, I mean, they still are, you know, in my, in my, in my conciencia and in my heart.
But in terms of DNA, it's a little different than I expected.
Yeah.
Very different than I expected.
One of my, my mom's aunts, she did a DNA and was surprised to see that she was like, I don't know, whatever it was.
60% Native, right?
And she's like, who in our family is Native?
I'm like, hello.
And for me, it was the other way around.
Where is it?
I need validation here.
My heart needs validation here.
And the DNA didn't do that.
And you know, speaking of the DNA stuff, what's funny about it is that
A lot of those databases, they have a lot of, whether it's Ancestry.com that they get it from or, you know, the 23andMe, whatever it is.
They don't have a lot of collections of indigenous DNA.
And so when they do the testing...
They look at their database and they say, oh, well, okay, this person has more of this and less of this over here.
Because the pool is not complete.
Yes, because the pool is small.
Okay.
Right?
So, I mean, it could turn out, like, if you had everybody's DNA on the planet, right, it would be vastly different.
But you don't have everybody's DNA on the planet.
Exactly.
So you only go with, you know, the pools that you have the most of.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, that's true.
That's good.
It's good to think about it.
So just remember, it's probably a little bit inaccurate.
Which is really interesting, too, because... But it's kind of... It's interrupting me.
Yeah, because... I'm kind of sorry I did it.
It uses... I mean, I don't want to call it pseudoscience, but it uses science... It's limited.
And what...
And there's so much reverence in science today.
Like, oh, science is 100% correct, right?
So when you see... Yes, exactly.
So when you see something like that, people are... They're quick to jump on the results, right?
Without thinking about, okay, well, what are all the different elements that go into those results, right?
What is the pull of all your DNA donors?
What is the, you know...
How much historical records do you have on that population of people as opposed to this other population of people, right?
And then when you start thinking about the history, oh, and now you're telling me that this whole population of people have been almost, you know, gone through a complete genocide.
And on top of that, you know, you have these other people who are coming in and dominating, you know.
Right.
dominating so yeah there's all sorts of stuff that you know we just we we forget to think about because we have been taught for so long that science is right you know and it it also makes us lazy that too i mean why stop yeah just because
They're the last word on the subject?
No.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
¿No quieres un panecito?
No, thank you.
I'm like, I told you I had a chorizo on eggs.
And I'm like, oh.
So I'm trying to take turns on the download.
I'm so sorry.
My house is a mess.
I would have clinked.
No, no, no, it's okay.
No.
um but yeah so I think that that's really helpful even though it wasn't you know we didn't have a very long conversation about the mestizaje stuff but I think a lot of that is is really helpful and yeah because acknowledging my mestizaje kind of gets in the way of my pride for my roots yeah what I think of as my roots yeah you know what I'm saying yeah
And so I need to think about it.
I need to think about it.
I feel very comfortable with Chicanismo and being a Chicana and having grown, I think, you know, I think having been formed and helping to form it because of when I had the privilege of...
of having conversations with people about it, you know, right at the crossroads, the 60s and the 70s and the 80s, you know what I mean?
Yeah.
And so it's been a privilege, but it's not finished.
Yeah, that also reminded me of, you know, this...
Since the Chicano movement, there has been more and more of a shift to want to label us as Latinos.
Right.
Hispanics.
And if we are calling ourselves mestizos.
Right.
That's just another one of these kind of like all-encompassing, lumping terms of identity.
Yes.
That doesn't get to the root of, you know, yeah, we're all one rasa, right?
But we have different experiences.
We have different histories.
We have different responses to those histories, right?
And you know what else just ran across my mind?
It lacks for me, and I need to do some thinking about it and some reading about it.
But it lacks the posture, the attitude that I find in Chicanismo.
Right, right.
In Chicanismo, I have that.
Yeah.
It feels good.
It feels mine.
And I've never found it in Latina, Hispana.
Latin American, Mexican American.
I've never found it in any... In Mexican, I have.
In Mexicana, I have.
But I recognize, you know, what?
I came to the United States more than I have a century ago.
So, yes, my roots are Mexican, Mexicana, but they are also other...
that I have gained, you know, in my experiences here and working for and learning with and from the community that, you know, embraced me.
Yeah, and I wonder, like, I don't know, maybe you can answer this, but I wonder if that
That attitude and pride that you are talking about in terms of chicanismo.
Posture.
Yes, the posture, right?
As opposed to Latino, Hispanic, whatever.
Those are labels.
Yeah.
But it's also because chicanismo and chicano and chicana...
are things that came out of the community right it wasn't somebody in their office oh we're gonna call them latinos now yes yes we're gonna put hispanic on the census right that this was something that you as members of this group said no we're not we're not those people this is who we are like it was a decision that
that those people made for themselves rather than somebody else telling them, this is who you are.
That's what I think, but you tell me.
Yeah.
I have to think about that one too.
It's intuitive.
It's not something I necessarily have to think of.
It's not my label.
It's my posture.
Right.
It's who you are.
It's who I am.
It's my attitude.
When you talked to Luis, did he bring up Corky's poem?
Yeah.
That's always been a good anchor for me.
That aha.
And this is when I was a young teacher at San Jose High when I was doing Chicano studies that I ran across it.
Yeah.
That was not only something that, that, um, uh, that we talked about and incorporated, but it's something that gave me a very important aha.
And it's interesting too, because Corky's poem is coming up a lot with, um, with people who were involved in the Chicano movement.
Right.
So all the people that I'm talking to, um,
And what's interesting about it is that it has, it talks about that mestizaje, right?
Of being both the colonizer and the colonized.
So I, when I... And that's the reconciliation that I'm talking about.
Yeah.
That I am not fully there.
And I'm 72, I better hurry up.
Yeah.
But, and I wonder, like, I don't know,
Maybe I shouldn't wonder this stuff out loud.
Maybe I'll just write it down.
But no, I was just thinking about... Because I think... You know how I was saying that... These scholars who have... In the past 20 or 30 years... Who have been using mestizaje as a method... That they see it as a reconciliation...
Right.
They see it as a reconciliation.
Like, oh, see, we have it's possible to be two conflicting things at once.
That's the reconciliation.
Right.
And and I think what what I'd like to do is to dig a little deeper and see where people are are using it in that way.
Mm hmm.
And people who are using it maybe like quirky to say, there's no reconciliation here.
And that's just part of like, and that's part of the creative tension.
Yeah.
Right.
Get us back to the creative tension, which I really like.
And I hope you'll tell me a little bit more about it, maybe through email or something, but, um, yeah.
So this is really good.
Very, very fruitful discussion.
Thank you.
Um, likewise.
Is there anything else you'd want to add or you think I didn't ask you about or you want to talk about for posterity?
I'd like to read a little bit what you might suggest.
that might help me to catch up a little.
Because I'm thinking, I've stayed busy, you know, I substitute in Central Unified and whatnot, and I've stayed busy in that sense.
But in terms of staying busy with
I've kind of taken a break from reading, and I'd like to pick up a couple of books that will help me to catch up a little bit on what's been discussed in the last maybe decade in Mesti Safi.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, there are a lot of, like some of the books that I'm looking at that are using it in that way that I was saying,
are going to be books like maybe you're familiar with Gloria Anzaldua.
She writes a lot about it.
And now I don't necessarily agree with her, but this would just be like, here's how people are using it.
Because the contemporary scholars are looking at her, right?
They're using her.
It would be interesting to see what she looked at.
She looked at Vasconcelos and a lot of the stuff that was coming out of the Chicano movement is where she's getting her ideas from.
And I've had like, I've talked to some people who say like, oh no, she's not like Vasconcelos at all.
And I'm like, where are you finding this?
Like who has done the research on this?
And they disappear.
Okay.
but um let me get my phone so I can write it down yeah so her work would be like just to kind of get a baseline of what these other contemporary scholars are basing their stuff on here I'll tear you out a piece of mine you're not gonna mess up your I don't know maybe I don't know how it works yeah be careful
If you do that, don't tear the whole thing.
Like tear a little piece.
Oh.
Yeah, yeah.
Look, this whole thing comes out, I think.
Whatever.
Yeah, so that would be somebody just to kind of get like the baseline.
Okay.
Oh, oops.
On the saw.
and her book is called borderlands and you know if you if you like what she says that's your prerogative i don't i don't really care for what she writes about but um and then there's another one what's it called oh this bridge
This bridge called My Back.
It's like a collection of essays.
Well, that's good.
My Back.
Thank you very much for inviting me to participate with you.
I hope I help.
I'm trying to think if there's anybody else, but that would be, those would be good starting points.
Thank you.
But, um, yeah, and most of my, my stuff is like, or, you know, the stuff that I'm reading is from older, older work, like the Vasconcelos stuff, a lot of stuff prior to the revolution, just after the revolution.
um and then a whole bunch of articles and stuff like that but um but yeah you can you can find a lot of info on it um i think i have this but it's been a while yeah and uh yeah
And then when I'm done with my work, I'll send it to you.
Okay.
That'd be wonderful.
But, all right.
Okay, so let me borrow your pen for a second.
So I'm going to send an email to Irma.
Yeah.
Castro.
Ramon and Betty Martinez.
And Cristina Luna.
And Diana Gaspard-Pena.
I don't have her.
Oh, Diana.
Oh, yes.
That's what I wrote down.
Yeah, she was, yeah, she's interesting.
I ran across her on Facebook, and I saw her art, and so we started talking in Facebook.
Are those all of hers?
These two are hers.
And this one, she put this one up.
And my first granddaughter, Siomara is her name.
She's an angel in heaven.
But this is about how old she would be.
I saw her and I go, oh.
So I got her.
And then she posted something else.
And my other granddaughter, she reminds me of my other granddaughter.
She's part Ethiopian, my granddaughter.
And, uh, that's how I've gotten.
We're, we're a similar mind, you know, we, we, uh, in the, the things that, that we talk about on Facebook, we're, we're a similar mind.
And, uh, I think she's a little younger than I am.
I know she's a little, quite a bit younger than I am.
Yeah.
But she's from the Bay area too.
She might be very interesting for you.
All right, well, is there anything else we want to... Gaspard, is that what you have, Gaspard Pena?
That's what you told me.
Yeah.
Okay.
All right, well, I guess we will be done here.